Te Tiriti and a second-term city councillor for
Hamilton City Council. So thank you for the
time today. I appreciate it.
We've just
had some information presented to us at council around
our perceptions of alcohol-related harm in the
community,
which was a survey we did
earlier in the year,
which had about 450 submissions. And in
that, the community clearly communicated to us
a concern for the levels of harm that are still
evident in our community around alcohol.
So it's with that in mind
that I bring my submission to you today, thinking
that our community is still very concerned with the level of harm that they're
seeing,
and in particular, the levels of
crime and violence that are associated with alcohol in
our community. So a concern overall for general safety.
So in making my submission, I guess my main
concern is that the amendment proposed
appears to
increase alcohol availability in our community.
And we know that increased
alcohol availability is associated with increased harm.
I think that's been well-researched and
understood. And so my concern with
the proposals is that it basically looks to
I guess not recognize the harm that's associated with
alcohol still, and
I don't believe that it's in our community's best interest to increase
that availability no matter how it might be
derived.
Anna, can-
So-
Anna,
we're going to run out of time, and-
Yes
... I'm keen to ask a question.
Okay.
Because you're the first councillor we've had.
Tell me-
Oh, is that right? Okay.
Well, we may have had a couple, but not many.
So one of the big issues is a lot of this is administered
by councils. So even in your Hamilton, you're a second-term
councillor, even in your Hamilton area-
Mm-hmm
... what rules do you have in your licensing which says
that you cannot have
an off license
within 200 meters of each other? Or do you have restrictions like that
in your laws?
No.
Or do you-
No, we don't. We don't have a local alcohol policy in Hamilton, so
that's part of the conversation that we're having at the moment.
So
my understanding is our licensing is largely directed by the act.
So,
yeah. So we are looking-
So that's part of the problem as well.
Yeah. It is part of the problem. And I guess that's one of the
concerns that I have with the amendment, and I do need some clarification on it,
because my understanding is you're looking to restrict the objectors to
if they live within one kilometer of an off license.
But I heard a submission earlier today where you were looking to
clarify that. So is that not the case?
Because that was my understanding, that you're looking to restrict
objections to within 1K of an outlet.
No, that's not right. It's within-
Okay
... the area, licensing area.
Because that would be really concerning, yeah, for me, because I think that
harm extends across the city and people are concerned
on a general level and should be able to object
around particular licenses in particular areas.
Yeah. Of course.
Yeah.
Hey, tell me, your survey, is that
something you can make available through the appropriate channels to the committee?
Oh, yeah, definitely. Yeah.
Yes.
It signals, I guess, that there was some
suggestion that perhaps the numbers of bars and taverns, et cetera, that we've got
is about right. There was a concern,
though, a quite high percent, I think over 60% of
people were concerned that we had too many bottle stores.
So
in Hamilton we do have,
because we're quite a compact city, so we have a higher number of bottle
stores
in an area sense than a lot of other
locations. So we're, I would say, quite saturated in that way
with the provision of alcohol, and we just don't need more.
So that was perhaps my main point was,
and I understand people might want to go and have a haircut and
get a glass of wine, but actually, we've got alcohol
everywhere and perhaps there's some spaces that we can just leave
and reduce the availability, recognizing the harm that
exists
already. So yeah, that was-
All right
... the main point that I wanted to make.
And
local alcohol policies, I think are really important, and we're hoping to
get one across-
Okay
... the line.
All right. Hey-
And so I don't want the
standing of those reduced in any way, which I understand is part of the amendment
as well.
All right. Thank you very much, Councillor.
Yeah.
Very good.
Okay.
All right.
Thank you very much. All right.
We're going to Dr. Rose Crossan.
Hopefully she's available.
Kia ora. I am available.
Hello.
I'm just trying to get my video to work for you.
Well, we can hear you clearly, and we can see you wonderfully now.
Now you can see me.
Right. We've got five minutes with you, so we haven't got long.
Sure. Kia ora. So my name is Dr. Rose Crossan.
I'm a senior lecturer in the Department of Public Health in the Faculty of Medicine
at the University of Otago Christchurch.
I have a PhD in addiction studies, and my specialist area of research
expertise is drug and alcohol harm.
And I put in a submission on behalf of a group of academics from our Faculty
of Medicine at the University of Otago who have diverse expertise, as
you would've seen.We do not support the
amendments in the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act Amendment Bill,
because we believe it'll increase access to alcohol and lessens the
ability for communities to have a say in the amount of alcohol in their
neighborhoods. And as well as being contrary to evidence of what
works to reduce alcohol-related harm, we're particularly concerned about the
impacts on other parts of the health and social system.
For example, the government has a goal to reduce stay times in emergency
departments, yet alcohol-related presentations contribute to
ED wait times and increase overcrowding.
The government's recently released a mental health and well-being strategy, which
is aimed at reducing mental health issues in New Zealand,
yet alcohol consumption is associated with depression and anxiety.
And the government's released an updated suicide prevention action plan aimed at
reducing suicide, yet alcohol is associated with increased
suicidal behavior and action. So we believe that the Sale and
Supply of Alcohol Act needs to be re-weighted back towards Objective
B, so that the diverse social, economic, and health
harms of alcohol are minimized.
Right.
I'd be very happy to take questions.
Right. Members, questions from any?
Hey, maybe just while people are thinking, I was just asking this
question. One of the big issues is at a local level,
central government always sets the overarching framework.
But at a local level, councils and district licensing
authorities have the ability to say no, or maybe
they don't have sufficient rules around how many
off licenses can be located. Have you got any
information on that? In terms of-- Because that's where the rubber hits the
road, isn't it? Because whether you allow 200
meters next door to the next one, and you allow them all four times around
the same intersection. Have you got any insight into that?
So the research evidence is very
strongly associated between the increasing alcohol
outlet density and increased harms, whether that be
crime or other issues. So there is clearly a
relationship in the evidence between alcohol outlet density
and the harms that are seen.
As I understand it, but please correct me if I'm wrong, these
amendments would mean that even if a council
had a local alcohol policy and was trying to reduce the
number of alcohol outlets in the area, that they would be
unable to refuse to renew a license that was then
inconsistent with a new LAP. Is that-- So,
in which case then, it is taking away the power of an
LAP to reflect the
community's desires and
the evidence of harm.
Okay. Well, that's going to be a question we ask.
All right. Members, any other questions from anyone?
All right. Hey, fantastic. Hey, thank you, Dr. Crossan.
That's very good that you've come in on this afternoon.
Thank you for having me.
Right. Okay. Now, we've got the New Zealand Winegrowers Association, Philip
Gregan and Sarah Wilson.
You have.
How are you?
Very good.
Right. Rip into it.
Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you. Philip Gregan, CEO of New Zealand Winegrowers, and
Sarah Wilson,
General Manager Advocacy at New Zealand Winegrowers.
I'll just make a couple of
introductory comments,
and then I'll speak about one particular aspect of the bill, and then
Sarah will just address a couple of others.
In general sense, we're supportive
of the
legislation. By way of background, we have
around about 240 winery cellar doors
throughout New Zealand. Winery cellar doors are generally
located at the winery or on a vineyard, which is the
source of the grapes or the wine. So their
location is intrinsically tied to
the origin of the grapes and the wine, and that's an
important thing for us within considering the
context of this bill.
Wineries and our members obviously invest very heavily
in
their facilities, in their winery
cellar doors, and that investment is
made with a view to the long term,
obviously.
Look, the two sort of particular aspects that I would just like to
address before I hand over to Sarah is,
first,
around the issue of objections to applications and
the formal right to respond to
objections. We support these changes.
We believe that
the investment in winery cellar door and vineyards, these things
are important investments for
businesses.
And I think being able to respond to objections is important.
In terms of the out-of-region objector, we
see the overarching
national law setting the framework in which regional
decisions are made. As a national organization, we do not
get involved in
individual license applications.
We see our role as being involved in, as we're doing at the
moment, submitting on the legislation.
And we think the restriction to the local area
makes
practical sense.The second point I'd
like to make is around district licensing committees and
LAPS. As I said, our cellar doors tend to
be located on the vineyards.
They
represent a significant investment,
and
if the government, for example, Ministry of Education, decided to
locate a school within 200 or 300 meters
of one of our cellar doors,
that might be in contradiction to an
LAP, and we do not see that as a reason
why
the
license should not be renewed
simply because of that
change. And within that context, winery cellar doors
are in the lowest risk category
of licenses.
So I'll just rest there and just hand over to Sarah.
Thank you. I'll go into a little more detail on two of the points raised in our
submission. The first is around the definition of winery cellar door.
That definition was adopted in 2024 as part of the Winery Cellar Door
Tasting Amendment Bill,
and our request is that the definition is retained and utilized
in Section 48 of the legislation. So that definition was
specifically developed to ensure that the different cellar door business
models could be captured.
The definition in Section 48 is more restrictive and excludes some
businesses that would be potentially thought of as a winery cellar
door. So for example, in Section 48, there's a reference
to produce harvested from land on which the premises are
situated. So you're thinking about a cellar door where the vineyard you can see
out the window is there, and that's where the wine is made from.
But the wording in the Section 5
definition refers to land occupied by the license holder for the
premises. So that doesn't just allow for vineyard A outside the window, it might
allow for vineyards B, C, and D, which could be up the road, it could be
elsewhere in the region, or it could even be in another region entirely.
So for that reason, we'd ask if the Section 48 definition could
be repurposed for a winery cellar door.
The second point that I'll briefly raise is around Section 52 and
the ability to use zero alcohol beer, wine, and
spirits for the purposes of meeting the criteria to
provide what was previously low-alcohol products.
While we are seeing significant growth of lighter wines and zero-alcohol
wines, we're not currently aware of anyone producing a wine that's between
1.5% and 2.5% alcohol in that specific range.
So we welcome this additional flexibility to allow a 0% wine to meet
that purpose of the legislation. We've also raised a second
point, which is around Section 52, subsection 2,
which creates an exemption from the
requirements if a business is only selling beverages that they've produced
themselves. The comment that we make is around the need for that to
be noted on the license as a specific exemption, and we would
suggest that it should be readily apparent whether a business falls into that
category that's anticipated by Section 52 [2] , and
therefore that the need for an additional license exemption should be removed.
Happy to take any questions. It looks like we might have time.
Okay. We've got Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for that submission.
My question is around the definition questions.
When the
Tasting Amendment Bill went through, one of the
fraught questions was whether that could be extended to
on-site brew tasting provisions could be
extended to on-site brewers, cideries, and
fruit wines.
I just want to make it be clear, you're not suggesting that
those provisions shouldn't be extended, are you?
No, no. Apologies if my submission was unclear.
We support the proposals in the legislation to broaden
the legislation to producer tasting rooms.
However, we are asking that the definition of a winery cellar door is
not removed, and it is implemented instead in Section 48,
which currently has what's arguably a quasi-definition of a winery cellar
door
that's been used in the past, now that we have something that's more fit for
purpose.
All right. Thank you.
Right. I think we're there.
Thank you for your submission to both of you, and thank you for turning up in
person too, by the way. All right.
Thank you.
We're going to Mr. Mandeep Singh.
Mr. Singh, I think you're coming on.
Am I doing good? Okay. Can you hear me?
Hello. We can certainly hear you. Can't see you.
Now, we've only got five minutes, Mr.
Singh, so we haven't got much time.
Okay.
Hello, kia ora, members of the committee.
My name is Mandeep Singh, and I live in South Waikato and have worked in
hospitality for over 14 years. Thank you for the opportunity to speak
today. I support the intent of this bill, particularly
the changes that improve fairness and transparency
in the licensing process.
The perspective I bring today comes from ground-level
experience. It does not come from a textbook, research paper, or
policy document. It comes from over 14 years of
working in hospitality, managing licensed premises, and dealing with these
issues in real time with real people and
with real communities. Over those years, I have spent countless
hours monitoring intoxication, looking after patrons,
supporting staff, arranging safe transport home, and doing my
best to provide a safe and welcoming environment for my
community.One thing I can honestly say is that I have
never worked alongside an operator who wanted harm in their
community.
I have never met
a venue owner, publican, or duty manager who wanted to see drink and
driving violence or alcohol-related harm.
One thing I have observed from my practical experience is that, at
times, the relationship between operators, duty managers, and
authorities can become adversarial when we would
likely achieve more through partnership.
I believe operators, regulators, health agencies, and
communities all ultimately want the same thing: safer
communities and less harm. When people are working towards the
same goal, communication, education, collaboration can
often achieve more than simply working against each other.
Recent data shows alcohol consumption and hazardous drinking have been
declining, yet alcohol-related harm remains a
challenge. I fully acknowledge that the harm exists.
Another condition,
and that it must be addressed. However, if harm remains despite
years of increased regulation, I think it is fair to ask whether we should
continue exploring different approaches alongside regulation.
Perhaps the answer is not always another rule, another condition,
or another compliance requirement.
Perhaps greater partnership between regulators, health agencies,
communities, and responsible operators could help achieve
far even better outcomes. Licensed venues
are often where people come to unwind after work, celebrate
milestones, catch up with family and friends, support local clubs.
Okay. So Mr.
Singh, can I ask you a question?
No, sure thing.
Because they're much more valuable.
Because everyone's read your submission, of course.
You made the comment and recommendations, license renewals must be decided within
a reasonable and fixed timeframe.
You said you've been operating for 14 years.
Can you give us your experience around getting
your renewals? First of all, how often do you have to do it?
What's the general license period?
Every.
And what's been your experience in that process?
Every three years, and the recent experience I have had
is
we applied for our renewal at one of the
venues in 2024, May,
and we
have got the license renewal after a hearing in
2026. That is over two years of
waiting under duress before-
And under the rules, during that period, if you had a
three-year license-
Yes
... do you technically become unlicensed?
Is that-
No, you can keep operating, but there's the uncertainty,
the duress.
Yeah.
You feel-
And so-
... waiting. Why should you be waiting for two years?
And tell me, you got taken, you actually had to go to a tribunal,
whatever what you said there.
Yes, hearing. Yes.
But did you
have a background where you'd had
non-compliance, or was there extenuating reasons why you
ended up going to a hearing?
Yes, of course. There were a couple of incidents that needed to be addressed
that, again, why I support the bill is that could have
resolved without a hearing, but to go on a hearing.
Yes, there were incidents that could've been addressed and
solved, but you'd have to wait two years
to go on a hearing for those particular incidents that
happened before that time. They happened in 2022.
Right.
But they are discussed in 2025 or 2026.
Yes.
Yeah. Okay, cool. Right. Any other questions from our members?
I don't think so. Hey, thank you for joining us this afternoon.
You're welcome.
Really appreciate-
No problem
... getting back to us first.
Bye.
Right. We're going to Anna Muir, also by Zoom.
Anna, are you there?
If you are,
please feel free.
Kia ora.
Well, that's different. That's Craig Atkinson.
Kia ora, Andrew. Mr. Chair, I just wanted to-
Oh, yeah. Here you are
... Mr. Atkinson. Anna's not able to come today.
Oh, right. Okay. Sorry. Right. So Mr.
Atkinson, you were right, and the floor is yours.
Five minutes.
Kia ora.
Yeah, no. I oppose this legislation, and I look at it
from a point of neuron disabilities.
Somebody that has got a host of neuron
disabilities. Now, I should say that my
mum never drunk throughout her life.
And my dad was very minimal. It'd be one pint, if anything
more.
I went from being 13-year-old to being sort of what you would
describe as being Asperger's, very
inverting, very shy, and so forth.
Until having one can of beer,
by the appointment of Her Majesty, it said on the can.
One can of Carlsberg Special Brew.
And for the next 10 years, I was a raving alcoholic.
It affected me in
multiple ways, through mental health, depression, and attempted suicide.
And that was after being put on antidepressants and having a
glass of wine, and that. I don't think the
problem is just that we look at mothers that drink.
I think it's we've formed communities now that it
is built into the person and so
forth. I stopped for over six years,
and I knew after one more drink, I'd start again. And I do.
I drink on my own because it's a lot safer
for everybodyAt 40 year old, I was on a
drug and alcohol review with Doug Sellman, who was the leading
authority on drug and alcohol at the time, and it was suggested
then that you never fully mentally develop from the age you started
drinking. And I would say that's very quite
accurate for myself. That at times, in the right
circumstances, I've got a mental health of 13-year-old child.
Which, yeah, being a 50-year-old man with mental health and mixed martial
arts isn't always a good perception.
I think when alcohol does sort of affect young people in the way and
so forth on the development of the brain, we have to
look at this way, and possibly it is to actually look at
legislation that looks at raising the age of drinking alcohol.
I understand that would be
not approved by yourselves and listening to last couple of
submitters and that, where it's all about the mighty dollar and not
really about the care of the people that vote you into the elected
positions.
So yeah, I don't think I could get a trailer and go to any off
license and fill my van and my trailer with as much alcohol as I
wanted,
and that's the problem. Thank you.
Okay. Now I've got a question from Rima Nakley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Hi Craig. Craig, you've-
Yeah
... commented on a lot of our bills and-
... and I don't always agree with what you say, but I just want to
say thank you very much for sharing those very personal details.
That has made me understand why you've
made some of the opinions you've given in the past.
So thank you, and bless you.
Thank you.
All right. Hey, very nice to talk with you again,
Craig, and thank you for your contribution this afternoon. Okay?
All right.
Thank you. Bye-bye.
Bye. Now we're going to Beer Hokai Kopa.
Beer, are you there?
Yes, I am.
I
understand you'd like to be called Beer, so hopefully that's okay.
You can call me Dave, you can call me Beer, but-
Okay. Well, whatever.
Yeah.
Hey, we've got five minutes with you, Beer.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Well, Na ma ngaaki tona ki a koutou katoa.
E tene ahi hahi. Warm greetings to everybody this afternoon.
I just want to start by
noting, of course, that holding an alcohol license in New Zealand is a privilege
and not a right. I don't support any of the proposed changes to the
act.
And in particular, I don't support any restrictions on distance in
respect of objectors, and that's what I'm going to very briefly speak to
today. In particular, two things: where people live,
and then where their whanau live and their cultural
connections are. And to do this, I want to first draw on several
recent cases where we have had community objecting
to liquor licenses
here in Kerikeri, or applications here in Kerikeri and Waipapa.
Waipapa's a small neighboring settlement
outside of Kerikeri, which is largely a commercial and industrial
center on State Highway 10, with just a couple of residential
streets.
In this example,
all from the past few months, have involved two local major
bottle shops, a major supermarket, and our famous
Packhouse markets. Now, Kerikeri, I'm presuming that some
of you may have been here. It's notable that although our
population's around 8,000, it has 49 licensed premises.
That's 49. That's made up of 30 on licenses,
13 off licenses, and six clubs. And if you're doing the sums,
that's one liquor license for every 163 residents.
Now, the customers for these businesses live within a radius of
perhaps up to 50 kilometers, and sometimes much further away,
as Kerikeri's a hub for not only shopping,
but also for schools, childcare, medical, dental,
social, community, and other professional services.
And as a result, many people choose to purchase their alcohol whilst in town.
For example, people travel from as far west as Rawene in the
Hokianga. That's 70 kilometers. Coopers Beach up north here,
62 kilometers. And Russell to the east, a 39-kilometer
drive and a ferry ride too.
And unfortunately, all too often those customers open their alcohol on the
way home, not just increasing the risks of crashes while drink
driving, but as you'll observe if you're driving around most of the major
roads up here, the huge amounts of alcohol litter are usually
commencing within a few minutes of leaving these shopping settlements.
The same alcohol reaches our rural whanau, where serious harm such as
family violence and sexual abuse and assaults occur.
Simply, the Far North has the highest rates per capita of
family harm
in Aotearoa, substantially more than the average.
And of course, harm does not recognize a one or two kilometer boundary.
Our health and social service providers reflect a much higher
incidence of alcohol use during pregnancy, with rates quoted
from about one in 10 to almost half of our young people being adversely
affected in some way by that prenatal alcohol
exposure.
This does not recognize a one or two kilometer boundary.
I'd also draw your attention to those family members who are forced to seek
employment in other parts of Aotearoa New Zealand, or even Australia.
These people are often concerned about what happens for their family members still
at home, their well-being, and what sort of environment they're going to be
coming back to.
Limiting objections by distance will preclude these people from
ensuring their families are not subject unduly to
alcohol harm. They should have the opportunity to share their
concerns with the DLC, and it's over to the DLC to assess
the relevancy of such objections.
I think we're all pretty moved this morning by the testimony of the Sims family
regarding the tragic circumstances of their son's preventable
death.I don't support any restrictions on distance in
terms of objectors. And lastly, you will have read in my submission that
if you are limiting objections by distance in some respect,
then you'd also, I think, need to be considering the composition of the DLCs who
are charged with making those decisions about our local
communities. I've offered an example in my submission there, that
relates to professional members who sit on as many as 13
different DLCs throughout the country.
And in supporting our community's objections to the DLCs,
I've sort of realized that the unique factors which impact
our largely rural communities are not understood by these
professional contractors. So, if you do choose to recommend
any sort of
restrictions on distance for objectors, I ask that you make recommendations
imposing the same conditions on DLCs, ensuring that they are solely
comprised of members who live in the said limited area.
And so, in conclusion, I just want to ask that every decision that you make
regarding these proposed changes, that you consider each
proposal and the testimony you have heard and read against the object
of the act.
That's really important because that provides very specific aspiration
for reducing the pervasive direct and indirect harm
from alcohol in Aotearoa, New Zealand.
And I'm going to point out that even though the
parliamentary website says it, it is not an act which seeks to
improve economic growth.
Okay. All right. We're running out of time there.
We've got a question from Camilla.
Thank you. Thanks for your submission and for keeping
in touch with the submissions as we've gone throughout the day.
The question I had is just to kind of draw out your last comment a little bit more.
Do you think that there are aspects of this bill which are
inconsistent with the objectives of the primary act?
I think all of them are. I think that's why I've implored you to go that each time
you want to consider
the object to the act, because my experience, and I've worked with the old law
and the new laws, is that many of the people involved in the licensing
system still have a frame of mind that considers and
works within the context of the old law and not the new law.
Thank you.
All right. I'm just going to ask you a question again, which we started asking
people. You've worked in the Far North.
You talked about all those different off licenses, et cetera.
What was stopping the council from actually just declining them
or putting-
I'm sorry, I've not quite understand your question.
The-
What was stopping the Far North Council from just stopping the
whole proliferation of off licenses in Kerikeri?
Why couldn't they just do that?
Well, they need to have a local alcohol policy in place.
I was a Far North District Councillor.
And why didn't they do that?
Well, I was a Far North District Councillor when that went before the council,
and the majority of councillors, five to four, voted out
the LAP,
because of the fact that the industry itself were objecting and
said that they would take it
further, and that would basically bankrupt the council.
So we're a small council up here, and had already been 120,000.
Yeah.
Yeah. All right. Hey, thanks for your time today.
It's been very helpful having firsthand experience.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're going to the Rotorua Youth Council.
Hopefully, they've accepted. Are you there
with us?
Hello.
Yeah, you are. Fantastic. Right. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Looking forward to hearing from all four of you.
The floor is yours, as they say.
Are you there?
Think we've lost them. Anna, have we lost
them?
Have we lost them?
Coming through.
Coming through or coming in again, Chair.
Okay. Thank you.
Are you there from the Rotorua Youth Council?
Yes.
Oh, good. Right. Now, let's get started. We've got 10 minutes.
Our names are Atahua Jean, Ayush, Sarah, and Sakura,
and we are representing Rotorua Youth Council.
We're here today to speak on the Sales of Alcohol
Amendment Bill, because alcohol harm isn't just a policy debate to us,
it's a lived reality that negatively impacts our wider community and
deeply affects our own whanau. While this bill is framed around
cutting red tape businesses, we're here to talk about what happens when you
loosen the regulations, and who pays the price.
Our main focus points is increasing the availability of alcohol
fails to protect our most vulnerable, starting with our rangatahi.
Our first concern of how this bill further, excuse
me, further normalizes the regular exposure of alcohol to young children outside
the home. To give you a context of what this looks like on the ground,
I want to share the snapshot of my friend's whanau with you.
I have friends who have nieces and nephews who are just still babies.
I know their mother's currently on a hard journey recovering as an alcoholic.
Every single day she fights to stay sober for her kids, and we stand right
beside her through it. But the moment we step outside of her front door,
that fight becomes twice as hard. When our younger generation
see alcohol constantly present, and under this bill,
potentially expand into even more everyday spaces
like local barbers, hairdressers, or club events,
it normalizes the very thing that broken-- excuse me, it
normalizes the very thing that nearly broke their families apart.
We are inadvertently teaching the next generation that
alcohol belongs to every corner of life.While
completely ignoring the invisible battle that many families are fighting
behind closed doors.
We urge this committee to postpone the commercial convenience
and consider the environment our children are growing up in.
Our second point is that alcohol and the trauma that alcohol can
leave behind on our young people is devastating.
When people think of alcohol harm, they think of the person drinking, but they
don't think about the harm that our youth carry
beyond those walls. They don't see our youth lying awake
at night in fear of uncertainty, and they don't see
the horrible arguments and the weight that these youth carry
into their classrooms the next day,
just trying to keep peace at home. They don't see the young person sitting
exhausted, distracted, and worried about what might
happen at home next.
Alcohol harm doesn't end when the person stops drinking.
Its effect still continues and stays with the family for years.
It damages relationships, creates fear, and leaves young people
feeling unsafe in places where they should only feel
protected. As Rangatahi, we know that
community wellbeing is much more than just statistics.
Behind every alcohol-related issue, there are
police calls, hospital admissions, injuries, and
family who's left affected by the
traumatizing after effects of this alcohol.
Behind many of these families are young people trying to carry burdens
that they don't have the option to escape.
That's why we, as Rangatahi, are concerned about the changes that alcohol
could make on Rangatahi if it were to become easier
to access. Protecting our youth from alcohol should become
first priority before making alcohol convenient to buy or sell.
Our third point is on equity. Most liquor stores are
located in suburbs rated highest on the New Zealand Deprivation
Index. This is an equity issue because these loosened
regulations will hit high deprivation communities the
hardest.
So making alcohol easier to sell and lifting regulations
doesn't just create business opportunities, but it floods the
gates in communities that are already under immense pressure.
We, as the Youth Council, believe that it's already unfair how these
communities are targeted more than others.
As youth councilors, we want to look forward to a future where our
local environment will lift us up, not weigh us
down.
True economic growth should never come at the expense of a
community's right to health, safety, and equity.
To conclude our message to you today, it's simple.
Protecting our youth from alcohol harm should come before making alcohol easier to
buy or sell. We are the ones who will inherit the decisions you make in this
room. But the truth is, we inherit the consequences
already. For decades, Rotorua has carried the weight of generational
trauma fueled by alcohol harm.
The world saw it on "Once Were Warriors,"
but for too many of our whanau, that wasn't just a movie set in Rotorua,
it was and still is a lived reality.
Our generation is trying to break those cycles.
We are trying to heal, but we cannot heal if the laws in this country keep making
the poison easier to access. We urge you to choose the wellbeing of
our whanau and our future over commercial convenience.
Our recommendation is that you do not go through with this bill.
All
right. Thank you, all four of you. We've got a couple of questions.
First one from Rima Nagli.
Kia ora, everyone. Look, thanks for coming on and
submitting to us. Can I just ask
safe space type of question?
How
easy is it, have you seen, for people around your age,
Rangatahi around your age, that are underage to acquire alcohol?
I'd say relatively easy.
Yeah, definitely. At every party I go to, everyone's
drinking, and even though we've got laws around the age you can buy
alcohol, still people get their hands on alcohol really easily
because they'll have friends that are older that can legally buy
alcohol. And this is just an easy way to get alcohol to everyone,
even if they're underage.
Mm-hmm.
Okay, cool.
More questions, but I'll-- Go ahead, Camilla. That's okay.
We've got Camilla.
Kia ora. Thank you very much,
to all of you for your powerful submission.
I just wanted to ask, a lot of us, all of us on this
committee are much older than you and have seen,
from our perspective, a reduction in the use of alcohol.
But I'm really interested to hear from you because it seems that from your
perspective, there is still a lot of alcohol involved,
especially in your Rotorua area, for young people.
And so I just wanted to know,
how do you see
the future of New Zealand and the way it interacts with alcohol?
What would be your ideal
change that you would like to see or that you anticipate seeing if people
like us try and get these laws right?
Definitely, I see a lot of people around our age, like
youth,
believing that the only way you can have fun is through alcohol and
substances these days. I hear a lot of my friends saying
that.
And I think we all know that that's not true.
There's definitely a heavy reliance on it, which is a big concern,
especially considering how young we are allowed to
develop-This sort of mindset. So,
my ideal future would be that people see that you
can have fun,
and enjoy parties without alcohol or
substances.
And adding on to that, I think I would like our
ideology, especially in Rotorua, that alcohol isn't so
strongly tied with these detrimental effects on
youth that we have at the moment. I'd like for
alcohol to be
correlated with something light-hearted and
enjoyable without reckless damage and
without overuse.
All right. Hey, thank you-
Thank you
... all four of you. It's been fantastic, and
nice to have younger people contributing to the Select Committee.
So very good. Great submission, well written, and
nice how you've done it. And if you ever do it again, just make sure you leave
time for questions because that's the most valuable bit.
But hey, fantastic what you've done today, and I think we've all
enjoyed hearing from you.
Thank you.
All right. Now, we've got to move on to the National Road Trauma
Center.
Kia ora, chair and members of the Justice Committee.
My name is Sarah Dean, and I'm the founder and trustee of the Road
Traffic Accident Trauma Charitable Trust, trading as the National Trauma Center.
I appreciate the opportunity and to appear before you today.
The National Road Trauma Center's interest in this bill relates to the impact of
alcohol harm can cause on road safety and road trauma outcomes.
We come before the committee with a deep respect of the role of Parliament in
considering diverse perspectives and making decisions in the public
interest. Our purpose today is not to advocate for a
predetermined outcome. Rather, it is to ensure that the impacts of
alcohol-related trauma on individuals, families, and communities
form part of this discussion and are considered alongside other factors
when decisions are being made. The most recent
verified government data shows that in 2024, there were 47
deaths where driver tests were alcohol limited,
or refused testing. We acknowledge that the evidence presented by other
submitters regarding declining alcohol consumption trends and
increasingly available low and no alcohol products, these are two
positive developments. However, alcohol-related road trauma
continues, results in death, serious injuries, and significant social,
economic, and well-being effects for individuals, families, and
communities. It is those impacts that remain our focus of our submission
today.
While fatalities
rightly receive significant attention, many more people
survive road crashes and serious and life-changing injuries.
The latest Major Trauma Annual Report recorded
2,808 major trauma admissions in New Zealand, with the
2024-25 the highest number recorded to date,
with transport incidents accounting for approximately 45% of all major
trauma admissions into hospitals.
Road trauma statistics are more than numbers.
They're a signal of how we are performing as a society.
They reflect the effectiveness of our laws, policies, regulatory settings,
infrastructure, enforcement, and community attitudes
towards safety.
By 2013, New Zealand had reduced its annual road toll to
253 deaths, our best road safety record in more
than 60 years. Importantly, despite considerable investment and
effort since then, we have not achieved a lower annual number since
2013.
While the annual fatalities may fluctuate year from year, they
remain sustainably higher
than the year 2013 low point.
This is an important observation.
Significant investment has been made in safer roads, transport
infrastructure, vehicle safety, and other safety initiatives, yet road deaths
and serious injuries remain a persistent challenge.
This demonstrates the complexity of road trauma and suggests that infrastructure
improvements alone are not sufficient to achieve the
reduction in deaths and serious injuries.
From a road trauma perspective, it is important to consider not only alcohol
consumption itself, but also where alcohol is consumed and the
transport environments where people navigate to return home.
The persistence of road trauma highlights the importance of considering how
legislative and regulatory settings influence alcohol-related harm.
As Parliament considers this bill, we respectfully suggest that decisions
regarding alcohol licensing, trading conditions, and availability should
also be concerns in that context. The location of licensed premises,
local availability of alcohol, and distance people travel after drinking
are relevant considerations. Despite substantial investments in
roads infrastructure, it still continues to be
a significant number of fatal and serious injuries each year.
Road trauma extends far beyond the moment of impact, and road trauma
continues to carry significant social and economic costs.
According to the Ministry of Transport socio-economic estimates,
the average social cost of a fatal road crash exceeds $80 million, while
serious injuries of road crashes are estimated to cost about $1
million. These estimates include healthcare costs, loss of
productivity, reduced quality of life, and the wider impacts
experienced by families, individuals, and communities, and the economy.
These impacts are not limited to physical injuries.
Recent research has also shown a proportion of people who
have experienced major trauma
from road crashes also experience major psychological distress,
including post-traumatic stress disorder.
The trust perspective is not only informed by research and engagement, but
also many years of direct involvement in supporting people affected by road trauma.
Historically, the trust has established one of New Zealand's first dedicated road
trauma counseling support clinics, operating in partnership with the Canterbury
Charity Hospital. The clinic was established with the leadership and support of
Emeritus Professor Nigel Blampied, a co-founder of the trust, alongside
Professor-With Sir Philip Bagshaw.
During that period, I had the privilege of overseeing and facilitating services of
many people impacted by road trauma and their families.
And over many years from my work for the National Trauma Centre, I've had the
privilege of listening to and supporting many people who have been affected by road
trauma, including many individuals who have lost loved ones on New Zealand roads.
Many individuals have spoken to me about their grief and loss, but not only of the
knowledge of the death,
but
also about the knowledge of the death that there was a loved one that was
preventable. For individuals affected by road
alcohol-related trauma, it is an often additional layer of
psychological distress associated with the preventable nature of the death.
One of the observations that have stood out to me most is that
personally, people over the years I have
noted a profound emotional burden, additional to
others that have carried, knowing that the loved one's death was inevitable,
but arose from decisions from another person prior to the crash, including
the decision to consume alcohol and then drive.
What many people also
struggle with the most is that the knowledge of the death was preventable.
Alcohol is a legal product, and most people consume it responsibly.
However, when alcohol contributes to impaired decision-making behind the wheel, the
consequences can be devastating.
These conversations can be reinforced by the importance of assuring that the
impacts of alcohol-related road trauma remain part of discussion
regarding alcohol policy and regulation.
And to put it simply, I'm not here in my capacity as a founder of the trustee of
the National Trauma Centre. I'm here because over the years, many people
affected by road trauma have trusted me with their stories, their
experiences, and in many cases, their grief have often shared an environment they
consider safe, fair, and impartial.
And many of these experiences are shared with me in hope that that might help
others contribute to a greater understanding or inform future decisions.
That is why I'm here with you today.
While I cannot speak to you on behalf of every individual affected
by road trauma, I can ensure their voices are not forgotten.
It is in these voices and experiences that they have entrusted me that I
respectfully bring before the committee today.
Whatever conclusions the committee ultimately reaches regarding the bill,
we respectfully ask that the impacts of alcohol-related road trauma, including the
social, economic, and well-being impacts borne by individuals, families,
and communities, remain an important consideration.
Hey, thanks, Sarah. Very good. Right.
Members,
who's got a question for Sarah?
Right.
All right. Hey, I don't think you should take that as not being interested,
Sarah. We've had a lot of submissions.
But thank you for joining us today and sharing all of that with us.
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay.
Right. Now, we're going into the Community Action Youth and Drugs
group. So, I think hopefully we've got a couple
of people joining us from that.
Kia ora.
Hello.
Nice that you're with us. Hey, guys, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you.
We've read your submission, but keen to hear from what you've got to say.
So, Ko Rakhee Dababa toku ingoa.
Ko Elena Mihajlovic toku ingoa.
We're here today on behalf of Community Action on Youth and Drugs Tāmaki
Makaurau to share our feedback and recommendations regarding the
Improving Alcohol Regulation Amendment Bill and the future of alcohol
harm reduction in our communities.
Community Action on Youth and Drugs, or CAD, is a national public health
contract with a mandate of reducing alcohol and drug harm
for communities with 20 sites across Aotearoa, New Zealand.
CAD Tāmaki Makaurau works across the whole Auckland region to support this
kaupapa. A key factor of our work is supporting
community action and amplifying community voice so that our communities
can have agency over their health and their environment.
We recognize the need for alcohol legislation reform and have
acknowledged aspects of the bill that we support in our written submission.
We will take that written submission as read.
However, we are concerned that these positive impacts will be greatly outweighed
by other proposed changes within the bill that will result in increased
accessibility and availability of alcohol for our communities.
These include the extending of trading hours during televised special
significant events, allowing restaurants to hold off licenses,
and removing the current criteria for special alcohol licenses.
We feel that these changes do not include adequate safeguards to protect
communities from unintended outcomes and increased harm.
We will now elaborate on three other provisions of the bill.
First, allowing club licenses to apply for an on-license, as
discussed in clauses 17 and 18.
Our team facilitates and leads a network called the Sports and Alcohol
Ropu, which brings together partners in both the sports and public health
sector to explore ways to reduce alcohol harm within sports environments.
Through this network, we've been able to connect with sports clubs, sports
organizations, and regional sports trusts that have shared the impact of
alcohol harm on players, fans, and whanau, as well as the role that
club bars can play in perpetuating or reducing these harms.
We've also heard about the complex pressures and nuances of running a club,
especially when being run by volunteers, as is often the
case. We are concerned that allowing clubs to apply for an
on-license will increase the availability of low-priced
alcohol to the general public, defeating the purpose of a club license.
We're also concerned that allowing clubs to apply and hold an on license will
create additional pressures by introducing new license requirements
that some clubs may not be able to navigate.
Secondly, allowing hairdressers and barbershops to supply alcohol
without a license, as outlined in clauses 38 and
39We've heard from community and partners we engage with that
having alcohol-free community spaces is integral to ensuring community
safety and social cohesion. Allowing hairdressers and barbers to
supply alcohol to patrons creates an increased risk of harm in
an environment that is not being monitored or enforced by any
agency. And by not being required to hold a license,
hairdressers and barber shops will be able to supply alcohol without being
held accountable to license requirements and host responsibility
guidelines, and this increases the risk of harm to both customers and staff.
Additionally, hairdressing salons and barber shops are often spaces where people
may bring their whanau, including their rangatahi tamariki
and mokopuna. And research has shown that early exposure to
alcohol and alcohol branding is directly linked to earlier
initiation of drinking behaviors.
So ensuring that spaces like these remain alcohol-free can help keep our
younger generations safer.
And finally, introducing regulations on the rapid delivery of alcohol as
outlined in clauses 41 and 42. CAAT is really
encouraged to see the proposed regulations around remote deliveries, which
are both necessary and overdue. These changes will help ensure the
safety of both community members and delivery drivers when delivering
alcohol. However, we feel that these reforms can be
strengthened by extending these changes to all remote alcohol
deliveries, not just those considered rapid, i.e., within the two
hours. Furthermore, we also recommend introducing a safety
pause or a cooling-off period that would require all remote deliveries
be delivered at least the following day.
Delivery hours should also be limited to national trading hours or those
of any relevant local alcohol policy, regardless of when the sale has occurred.
Our current alcohol laws are outdated, and they're not fit for purpose.
So we really do welcome this opportunity to review them.
However, we must ensure that in seeking to modernize these laws
for our current context, that we're still meeting the original object of the
Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act, and we're also prioritizing the ongoing
and future wellbeing of our tamariki, rangatahi, tangata whenua,
and all communities. We thank you for the opportunity to share our submission, and
we welcome any questions.
All right. Thank you. Right, members?
No questions.
Okay.
Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you to both of you. Very good submission, actually.
Yeah, good.
Thank you. Ka kite.
Okay.
Now, we've got New Zealand Association of Counselors.
Eugene, I think I saw a message coming up before.
If you're available, Eugene,
just jump on.
Eugene, there you are.
Kia ora. Kia ora.
Kia ora. How are you?
Yeah, good, thanks. Yeah. I'm just-- Is there-- I'm just waiting on another-- Oh,
there we go. Just waiting on my colleague to tune in. Yeah.
Great. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Yeah.
Is that Tess with you or-
Yeah. Yeah, that's right. Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Yes.
There you are, Tess. Goodness.
Yes. Kia ora.
Right. It's all yours.
You go.
Oh.
Kia ora. I'm Tess Casey. I'm the executive director of
the New Zealand Association of Counselors.
So I lead our national office here in Wellington.
And I'm here with Eugene,
who is our te ahi kai.
Co-chairs our governance body,
and is also a practicing counselor.
So we're on behalf of the-- here on behalf of the New Zealand Association of
Counselors,
NZAC. We represent more than 4,000 counselors
working across Aotearoa, so they are in settings like
schools, they're in health services, they're in social services dealing with
family harm, social services dealing with victim support.
They're in justice settings, they're in corrections, they're in ACC,
and in our communities as well. So we're not a public health
lobby group. Our members are the people sitting across the
table from individuals and families,
after alcohol has already done some damage.
And I'll hand over to Eugene to tell you a bit about
what that looks like from our point of view.
Yeah. Kia ora, Tess, and kia ora, whanau.
Yeah, Eugene Davis here. Yeah, and as Tess says, I am,
yeah, te ahi kai, sitting with the executive, but also a practicing counselor and
have been doing
counseling for quite some time, and in particular, working with young
people and whanau within the community.
So,
a school counselor I spoke with put it simply, the effects of
alcohol in the home show up in the classroom every day.
Children arrive distracted, emotionally exhausted, unable to
concentrate. It affects their learning outcomes, and it is a contributor to
truancy rates. These kids are not disruptive because something is wrong
with them.
They're carrying-- they're actually carrying something too heavy to learn.
I myself have been able to work with young people, and I've seen the effects of
alcohol abuse within the home, within the communities, and it has a
ongoing effect throughout the community and in particular within our
kura. What our members keep seeing over and over is
normalization.
Children who grow up in households where alcohol misuse is present often don't
recognize it as a problem. The alco-alcohol is just part of the
furniture. It's what
adults do. By the time a counselor gets to work with that child, the harm has
already been running for years.
The harm often follows
them into adulthood and can contribute to anxiety,
depression, and relationship issues.
Counselors therefore will engage not only with the child that
has been affected, but also the adult that has carried these challenges throughout
their lives. These are not outlier ca-cases.
In any school community and/or social service agency, a
counselor will tell you that there are multiple young people in this
situation.Across the country, that number is very large. Right?
Our members are not making theoretical arguments about alcohol policy.
They are at the fence at the top of the cliff, but the bill
proposes to send more people over it. Okay.
So that's some of the experience that we've had and
voiced from our members of NZAC.
What's wrong with the bill? The one-kilometer objection restriction,
Clauses Four to Seven. Those bearing the consequences of alcohol harm
include extended whanau schools and social services.
NZAC members work with people affected by alcohol outlets
that do not live next door to. They are highly likely to be
located outside the one-kilometer radius.
The right to object should be based on the merit of their objection and
demonstrated connection to alcohol harm, not on a postcard.
Therefore, we reject this. Restricting objections to those within the
same council area or within one kilometer of premises may
exclude schools,
treatment providers, iwi, Maori community organization, national organizations,
Maori wardens and residents affected by the impacts of being on-- are
beyond arbitrary boundary. Requiring certification will further
deter public participation and impose considerable administrative burdens
on the licensing inspector. Expanding availability.
Takeaway alcohol from restaurants, alcohol and barbers and hairdressers to Clauses
38 to 40. Exempting hairdressers and barbers from licensing
requirements will broaden alcohol availability into everyday spaces and
normalize drinking alcohol in more-- in non-traditional settings.
More settings, more normalization, more access.
The research on this is consistent.
Reducing access reduces harms. This bill goes the other
way. Extended trading hours for televised support, Clauses
21 to 23.
Tying alcohol more tightly to sport, particularly for young people,
is the wrong move.
NZAC's core commitment is to predict-- protect the vulnerable people.
This is what brings us here. Our recommendation is we
strongly urge the committee to think holistically.
Do not narrow this decision to economic considerations only,
especially when the economic argument does not stack up.
Please consider the well-being of children and whanau.
They do not live in an economy, they live in a community.
At a minimum, don't make it worse. But if the committee wants
to make a real difference,
ring-fence a portion of alcohol revenue for mental health, addiction
treatment, and early intervention.
New Zealand collects $1 billion alcohol-- in alcohol tax.
Directing even a fraction of that towards the services dealing with the
consequences would be a meaningful step.
And that's
what we'd like to see. Yeah. So, kia ora.
Thanks, Eugene.
Yeah.
And, Tess, thank you very much.
Right, guys.
Just a clarification, Chair. So the point you make about the one kilometer-
Yeah
... there's been some talk about this today.
Okay.
If it was clear that it's the one kilometer
or from within the local licensing district-
Mm
... would that satisfy the majority of your concern around that issue?
No, no, because we're talking about, in terms of us,
councilors and the people that we work with,
we're working with people that--
like
communities and extended iwi that are working outside of that.
So that's what we're talking about. Yeah.
So I understand that. We've heard a little bit about that today.
Okay.
But
surely in every community,
if there was that level of concern about a particular
application
or relicense in a particular community, there would be
people from within that iwi or hapu from within that
community that could make that submission.
Within that-- Are you talking about within that vicinity?
Within either the kilometer or the local licensing district.
Remember, it's actually more about the local licensing district than it is the one
kilometer. The one kilometer is only relevant on the borders.
Mm.
Yeah. I'll bring Tess in here, but I couldn't attest to the
engagement. I couldn't be sure-
Okay
... that that iwi are
going to be in that vicinity to do that, because I'm talking
more widely from that. Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, take for example, Whanganui, where I'm from.
You don't need someone from Auckland submitting,
because their whakapapa back to Whanganui, when there are-
Mm
... within Whanganui, iwi and hapu that could submit
on that license locally.
If they're up to the plate, yes. If they're aware of that.
I'm assuming-
Yeah
... that would be the case. Yeah.
Okay.
Kia ora koutou.
All right. Thank you. All right. Thank you.
Just a quick one, Kahurangi.
Kia ora, Eugene. Thank you for your-
Kia ora
...
korero. I just wanted to ask a simple question.
Yeah.
Do you think that
reducing the
proximity to the bottle store for people
to make submissions will make it harder for iwi,
hapu, whanau to have their voice heard?
I think so. Definitely.
Thank you.
Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you, Eugene.
Thanks, Tess,
for contributing. Nice to see the photo behind you, Eugene.
Well, that's who I speak for.
Yeah. Very nice. All right. Hey, thank you.
Now we're going into the Porirua Whanau Center.
Liz, hopefully you're there. Are you?
Yep, I'm here.
Very good.
Yes, she is.
Okay. Right. Looking forward to hearing from you.
Ka pai. Nga mihi atu. Tena koutou katoa.
Ko Liz Kelly toku ingoa. I'm the Chief Executive for
Porirua Whanau Center. And
we provideTotal
wraparound social services across the Wellington region.
I don't know where to look. Do I look the front or I-
Look at the camera here.
Oh, okay. Across the
Wellington region, so we have two ECEs, one in Cannons Creek, with a
register of 65 tamariki, and one on the
Whitiora campus with a huge
wait-list of 39.
We are registered CHH, so we provide social
housing as well as
transitional housing, and we're currently in the process of building another
22 new builds in Tawa. So
we are based in Cannons Creek, though, which is one of the most
deprived communities in Aotearoa.
We work with whanau
going through some of the hardest things a family can face.
I've been working in this community for a long time, and I want to tell
you what community action on alcohol
actually looks like, because I think it's directly relevant to what this bill
proposes to do.
Cannons Creek has no pubs, no pokies, no bottle stores.
That is unusual for a community
of our socioeconomic profile, but that didn't happen by
accident. The community did it by using the right to
object and hold license holders accountable.
When conditions were breached, licenses were challenged.
When licenses came up for renewal, the community showed up.
People can still buy alcohol, but in Waitangiroa or Porirua
City or Aoteara, but not in the Creek itself, and
that boundary matters. I've been part of driving that kaupapa for
many years. I've appeared before licensing committees, and I
know what it takes. The one-kilometer restriction in this bill
would have stopped us.
Our organization works across Porirua and the Wellington region.
Many of the whanau we support don't live within one
kilometer of every outlet they're affected by.
Under the proposed rules, we would lose standing to object.
You cannot separate the right to object from the outcomes communities
like ours have achieved. One depends on the other.
Financial harm. In our budgeting caseload,
alcohol
misuse is one of the most consistent threats.
We see whanau where alcohol is consuming resources the household
cannot spare. Rent not paid, food not bought,
bills overdue. These whanau aren't struggling because they can't manage
money. They're struggling because alcohol has taken priority.
In our family
harm work, alcohol is frequently present, not as the
cause of violence, but as what removes the barriers to it.
We work with parents who love their tamariki, but alcohol
impairs judgment, emotional regulation, consistency.
That creates real risk for tamariki.
The next generation, we run our early childhood education from our Cannons
Creek site in Whitiora. The tamariki coming through our
kohanga are part of whanau navigating these realities right
now. We see how growing up around harmful alcohol use, the
violence, the fear, the inconsistency carries forward.
Policies that increase alcohol availability in communities like
ours are not neutral. They add to the burden those
tamariki will carry.
So there's three things. The one-kilometer objection
restriction, that takes away the tool that let communities
like ours do what we did. It is a direct attack on
community power and alcohol licensing, and we
ask you to reject it.
Expanding availability. Taking away alcohol from restaurants,
alcohol and barbers, and hairdressing adds more access points in communities
already dealing with consequences of too much access.
More availability means more harm,
and I ask you to reject that as well.
The right of reply, Clause 8 to 15, sounds procedurally fair.
In practice, it gives well-resourced industry
applicants a mechanism to challenge community voices.
The power imbalance in licensing hearings
already favors the industry. This makes it worse.
The communities most harmed by alcohol are the least powerful.
They have the fewest resources to fight license applications,
the least political influence, and the most to lose.
Cannons Creek proves that when communities have the tools, they
use them, and it works. This bill proposes to take those
tools away. We're asking you to reject the changes to
objection rights, reject the expansion of
availability, and protect the ability of communities to genuinely
participate in decisions that affect them. Nga mihi.
Right. Thank you very much.
Chair, can I ask a question here in the room?
Yeah, you go.
So just to clarify that our, or certainly my understanding of the one
kilometer, is it one kilometer or the
local licensing
authority area? So in your case that you've just
described around Cannons Creek, wouldn't have that meant that any whanau
from across that whole licensing area
could have objected?
Yeah, it does. But what it also meant, and it included,
were that people from outside of that one-kilometer
area that were affected had the right
and the opportunity to object as well.
In fact, in Cannons Creek, we mobilized the community.
Sorry, I appreciate that. Sorry to cut in, but those people, if they were living
within Porirua, under this new change, would still be
able to object?
Yes, but you're talking about where the harm happens.
So harm happens-- We're in Cannons Creek.
Yeah.
If there was one, we haven't got them now.
The last one didn't get their license renewed.
Yeah.
But say there was one there-
Yeah
... in Cannons Creek. We have people that are affected, whānau that are
affected, that live in
Titahi Bay, or they might live in Elsdon.
That's further than a kilometer, so it affects them.
But they're still within the licensing authority, so they would still be able to
object.
So we've heard that-
So are you talking about the boundaries of what used to be
Porirua District Licensing?
Correct.
Is that what you're talking about?
So if they were over the boundary, but within a kilometer of
where the license was applied, they would be able to object.
So why would you do that? My understanding is
it's to stop vexatious-
So it's to stop someone from Auckland
putting in an objection to the Cannons Creek.
But it's not to stop someone from Titahi Bay.
Yes. So can I say that when we first started to
mobilize the community-
Yeah
... and we were able to stop the pub, we had the
people in Auckland
come down, and they helped us.
Okay.
We didn't have the resources. The first time that we
objected, the Whānau
Center paid for the lawyer. That was huge. That was really huge.
But we took that. It was like insurance, fire insurance.
Yeah.
Okay.
All right.
Thank you.
Can you just explain your comments around Section
133? This is your third bullet point.
"Reject the changes that weaken local licensing processes,
specifically the amendment to Section 133 that prevents
licensing committees considering local
alcohol policies." Can I go with that?
Can you repeat that, please?
Your recommendation number three. That's what I'm looking at.
The right of reply?
Yeah. The Section 133.
Am I looking at the right one? Yeah, I
am.
Your recommendation number three, "Reject the changes that weaken local licensing
processes, specifically the amendment to Section 133
that prevents licensing communities from considering local
alcohol policies when renewing licenses."
Yeah. That's what we were just talking about.
So are you-
The wa mata
So are you saying that the way that you've written that,
it stops the licensing committees from considering local alcohol
policies?
Correct. That's what it does.
Yes.
Yeah.
And
so you want to see that
removed altogether, obviously?
Yeah, because what was the point in getting the community to put together an
alcohol policy?
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay.
If you're now going to stop us from having a say.
Okay, cool. All right. Hey, thank you.
Thanks for your time, Liz, and Sydney for coming in in person.
It's really nice.
Right, so we're going to go to Justice For All Incorporated
by Zoom.
Have we got Susanne or Lois here available?
She wasn't.
She's just coming up.
All right, cool.
In a few minutes.
Sorry.
If you're ready. Oh, very good.
Yeah, I hope.
We can't see you, but we can hear you.
Okay.
So I suggest you just get started, and if we can get the video going, that'd be
great.
Yeah. Okay.
Oh, there you are.
Yes, there we are.
There we go.
Sorry. You can see us now.
We see you.
Okay.
All right.
Oh, yes. Hello.
10 minutes left. We've got 10 minutes.
Yeah.
Thank you.
So, hello. I'm Susanne from Justice
For All, and first do no harm is
our foremost message to you. When responding to the proposed
changes in the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act
2012, we
remind you, first, do no harm. If it ain't broken,
don't fix it. Put people before profit.
In our view, the status quo is better than the proposed changes.
Today, we want to expand on our written submission,
in which we rejected this bill proposed
amendments. We are concerned that these amendments did
not include a health and safety plan, nor
any public education about alcohol,
that this would lead to unintended consequences.
We would, however, endorse any legislation that
reduces the harm of alcohol,
that reduces the numbers of people hauled into the justice
system because of alcohol-impacted behavior,
acknowledges that alcohol affects everyone differently,
understands that alcohol is a mitigating factor.
It is an aggressor drug, facilitates more drugs and
alcohol, calls for treatment, not for punishment.
Provides effective safeguard to protect the vulnerable.
The bill makes alcohol more available, more
accessible, both in time and places.
This is undesirable. As the evidence shows very clearly,
it increases its harm. The amendments to the
bill
claim to boost the economy through making the licensing more
streamlined,
more simple, more modern, while limiting the harm of
alcohol.
Well, this seems to be a gamble. What are its
chances? Just to do a number,
the harm of alcohol in New Zealand costs New Zealand
$9.1 billion a
yearWe currently have four distinct
alcohol licenses. The on license, the off license, the club license,
the special license. Each license has condition created
to reduce alcohol harm around its sale and supply.
Each license holder must abide by these
regulatory conditions in order to keep their license.
License inspectors enforce these regulation.
This is a simple compliance process.
It is easy to implement, easy to understand.
While not perfect, it appears to work.
The exception is the club license.
It poses the greatest risk of alcohol harm.
There is no manager here. Members must monitor
themselves. They are meant to look out for each other.
Rural clubs, especially rugby clubs, have a history of
risky intoxication and of modeling bad
behavior in front of children.
Additionally, drunk driving poses a risk in
rural districts.
Unnecessarily tragic accidents causes through alcohol
consumption linger in people's collective memory.
Here are two numbers. 38% of fatal
accidents on our roads can be traced
to alcohol. 66% of these
38% happen in rural
areas. In our view, we need
better policies
than what these current improving regulation amendments provide.
We believe contrary to the stated intent of providing
simplicity, the changes will create regulatory
confusion. In a quest to increase revenue for the
government, different types of license can be
combined. The question arises, how will
this impact enforcing licensing conditions?
How will this reduce alcohol harm?
Traditional restaurants are a place where people go
for a meal,
and serve the meal and venue according to rules
of responsibility. But the amendment will now
allow
that this restaurant can serve or sell
alcohol to take away as well.
This will impose a new administrative burden on these
businesses
and an additional risk of alcohol-related harm
and associated cost. So thank you for listening, and I
pass on to Lois.
Good afternoon.
I'm Lois McGirr. I'll carry on from Susanne.
We are concerned that the normalization of alcohol hides its
harm.
Everyone is impacted differently by alcohol, and the harm can vary from one
occasion to another.
This is not simple. There are lots of factors involved with
the harm of alcohol.
Some of the contributing factors are genetics, when you last
ate, if you are pregnant, if you're on medication,
your age,
and if you're already an alcoholic.
There are never any warning signs about the harm of alcohol in places that sell
alcohol, or conversations about the alcohol, how
alcohol could affect your behavior, your decision-making, your
health, or
how it could land you in prison.
The uncomfortable truth about alcohol harm is hidden.
If it was exposed, this would impact the profit margin.
Instead, the harm of alcohol is ignored and alcohol is
normalized.
The free glass of wine at the hairdresser normalizes alcohol and hides its
harm. The Governor General's stamp of approval for
prolonged after-hours public drinking hides
its harm.
We believe this messaging creates the illusion that if you drink responsibly,
there is no harm.
So effective that as a culture we think we must drink to
belong.
We must drink to have a good time.
The alcohol giants and their smaller satellite businesses use this messaging to
groom the next generation of drinkers.
We request
our legislators to respect the harm of alcohol and not to ignore it,
and above all, not to repeat this messaging.
In our view, the current
amendments give the alcohol industry greater powers to spread
their product.
We want laws that give communities power to stop this.
During 2020, my firsthand experience showed how difficult
it was for a community to prevent an off-license liquor store from setting up
business.
Many people in our community saw the harm of alcohol and thought we already
had enough liquor licenses
and liquor outlets.
Even though 100 people objected, the industry eventually won.
In our case, you could initially only object if you lived within a
one-kilometer radius of the liquor store.
And as few people lived in this area, the mayor used her discretion
to extend our right to stand to five kilometers,
and the objectors flooded in.
During the hearing, the voices of us, the little people, struggled
against the well-funded alcohol industry's lawyer, who was well-versed in the
legal process.
He made a play at following the legal democratic process when
he counted up the number of objectors and stated there's little
opposition here,
while ignoring the fact that the bill only allowed objectors from close
by.The character of this
hearing was a distortion of reality,
where a serious issue of potential alcohol harm was
minimized in a legalistic game.
When objectors won, it was only a temporary success.
The industry appealed this decision to the High Court,
and the objectors were so determined, we fundraised for our own lawyer.
After the hearing,
the High Court judges visited our township, did a walk around, and decided
we could afford another liquor outlet.
The words of the objectors were ignored.
They were not given the legal power
in the off-license setup business.
In our opinion, amending the sale and supply of alcohol is a serious piece of
legislation. It must be done with due diligence to
assess risks in a holistic way.
This must not be rushed.
There must be time to analyze the best way forward.
There needs to be both effective regulations to limit availability
and public education that addresses
alcohol the drug,
that tells our unique alcohol history-
Okay
... that debates the Law Commission's 2010
call to dismantle the marketing of alcohol. I'm holding up their book here.
It's quite a tome, quite a volume.
All right. Hey, we're just about out of time.
So if you could, you might just wrap up, if you like?
Yeah, okay. Well, finally,
to mend the sale supply of alcohol, we would like to
mend it, but do this in a way that empowers the people,
prioritize public health, wellbeing, and
keeping people out of the prison system.
All right.
Thank you.
Hey, thank you to both of you.
Briefly, have you got any questions
of the members? No. All right. Hey, thank you very much
for
your time this afternoon and holding up that
heavy book.
Have you read it?
Not personally, I've got to say to you, but
no doubt it's required reading, isn't it?
It is.
Anyway, hey, thank you very much for your time.
Okay.
Right.
Thank you. You're welcome.
Now, we're going to Brianna, who I think I saw that she was
going to be coming on by Zoom. Is that correct?
Kia ora. Yes, I'm here.
How are you?
Good, thank you. How are you?
Right. Good. Now, we've got 10 minutes.
Everyone's read
everyone's submissions, including yours, so don't need to go
over it again, but maybe highlight the key points.
Ka pai. Tēnā koutou katoa. Ko Brianna te kiitoko
ingoa. Thank you for the opportunity to present on behalf of Muaupoko
Tribal Authority.
Harm does not stop at boundaries, and neither should the right to
respond to it. That principle sits at the heart of Muaupoko's
concerns with this bill.
Muaupoko opposes this bill in its current form.
While it seeks to improve efficiency and reduce administrative burden,
we are concerned it does so at the expense of community wellbeing,
local decision-making, and equitable outcomes.
The bill treats alcohol as a product.
We ask the committee to consider it as a source of harm.
The bill prioritizes access and efficiency over harm
reduction.
In Horowhenua, we work alongside whanau every day who are
already navigating multiple pressures at once.
Housing pressures, cost of living, access to healthcare,
mental health challenges. Alcohol-related harm doesn't arrive
separately from those issues. It compounds
them. It contributes to pressures we already see in
homes, in whanau relationships, and across health and social
services.
Alcohol is not just an individual choice or a commercial
product. Its impacts are collective, not individual,
intergenerational rather than short-term, and relational
rather than isolated.
In Horowhenua, we spend a significant amount of time trying to remove
barriers to wellbeing for whanau.
This bill risks moving in the opposite direction.
We are concerned this bill will increase exposure to harm while
reducing the ability of communities to influence decisions
that affect them. The bill assumes increased
availability is a neutral change, but we do not
agree. For communities already experiencing inequity,
increased exposure to alcohol is likely to compound existing
challenges.
Our strongest concern relates to the restriction on who can object to license
applications. Limiting objections to those within a narrow
geographic boundary fundamentally misunderstands how
communities experience harm.
For Muaupoko, our relationship with whanau is not defined by
district. Our responsibility as mana whenua extends across
our rohe. If harm is being experienced by our communities, we
have a legitimate interest in responding to that harm, regardless of whether
an outlet sits inside an arbitrary boundary of the
district.
The bill reverses the community participation reforms introduced in
2023 by reintroducing geographic restrictions on
who may object. This risks excluding iwi, health
providers, advocacy organizations, and affected
communities whose interest in alcohol-related harm extends
beyond those district boundaries.
We are also concerned that this change assumes those most
affected are best positioned to participate in formal objection
processes.
In reality, those carrying the greatest burden of harm are
often the least able to engage with complex regulatory
processes due to time, cost, confidence,
or competing priorities.The result is a system where
those most affected are heard the least.
We are also concerned by the absence of meaningful Te Tiriti
provisions. The bill does not provide a clear mechanism for
partnership, does not recognize mana whenua decision-making, and
does not require consideration of impacts on Maori.
Given the disproportionate burden of alcohol-related harm experienced by
Maori, this omission is significant.
We urge the committee to reconsider provisions that increase alcohol
availability while reducing community influence.
Harm does not stop at boundaries, and neither should the right to
respond to it.
Right. Hey, thanks, Brianna. Very good.
Members, have we got any questions for Brianna?
You're from the Honoru-Hara-Whenua area, that's right?
Yes.
Yeah, cool.
Anyone else got any questions?
All right. Thank you.
Brianna, we've had a lot of submissions, a lot of them covering similar ground.
So it's not to say your
submission's not important, it maybe explains why we don't have a
question for you. But thank you for coming on this afternoon.
Thank you. Nga mihi nui.
Thank you. Right. Now we've got Dr.
Eric Hampton from the New Zealand Institute,
who should be there in person, hopefully. There you are.
Good to see you again.
We've got 10 minutes with you.
All yours.
Sounds great. I will refrain from just summarizing our submission.
I will take it as read. The key parts are that
we support the amendment bill as is put up.
We think it could be strengthened in a few ways.
There are a couple areas where it doesn't seem to go quite far enough.
There's sensible moves in allowing producer tasting rooms
outside of just wine. We think that those could be strengthened a little bit
further. I know of a case in Christchurch where--
I'll try and focus on things that have occurred to us subsequent to the
submission, taking the submission as read.
Okay.
And this is just one where
it hadn't occurred to me as a problem, and it wouldn't have occurred to the
drafters as a problem. It's just one of the things that happens when the bill is
drafted as it is and tries to do too much
under a licensing regime when harms are better mitigated elsewhere.
So there's a producer in Christchurch who has
a-- This is just silly. He's got a hot sauce operation, and he's trying to make a
chili gin. He can't get a reasonable license under any of the
existing categories. There's provision for a tasting license in here, but that
would run into all of the same
on-premise licensing hurdles that might
be run into for any off license,
tests around the suitability of the venue and the particular location.
There could be provision for a remote sales only or remote sales
only combined with producer tasting room license that wouldn't have to
consider local factors that would matter for an off license or
for on-premise
consumption. So it'd be neat to see that kind of an
improvement in addition to the matters that we discussed.
On having viewed a few other submissions, the only other thing I would want to
note is the potential for anti-competitive effects, depending on
how you proceed with some of the regulations here.
I like the moves around rapid delivery services where there could be
real risk of product being delivered to youths who have
ordered it in a big hurry, and it shows up in a hurry.
That same risk doesn't apply when I, for example,
or get my monthly subscription from Beer Hut, which shows up on the
doorstep once a month,
kind of at a random draw time. I couldn't time it, my kids couldn't time it.
If you start requiring
identity verification on pickup for any of those kinds of
deliveries, you're effectively going to knock out any of those business
models for
delivery-based operations, which are generally without harm.
If in the absence of any strong compelling evidence that there's a growing trend of
kids ordering online
outside of a rapid delivery service and just
hoping that their parents won't be home when things get delivered,
I would avoid tightening things up because you risk doing more harm to
moderate drinkers who enjoy delivery and the businesses that serve them
without any particular public health benefit. I'll shut up and yield to questions.
Right. Who's got a question?
All right. I'll go to 4.5, the right to reply
to official reports.
Please.
So you think that should be extended.
I presumed the bill, maybe incorrectly from my perspective, that
the person had the ability to respond to all
responses, but are you suggesting that the bill limits that?
It read as though it does. If it could be read as such
by others, then it risks having that effect.
Make clear that they've got a right to reply to all of the official reports.
Okay. And then 4.6 is an interesting comment.
You're saying,
and I presume what you mean by this is where you've got vexatious
claims or whatever, if they are deemed to be that, it should be
almost a pre-screening process so that the
ones that are taken to a hearing are on bona fide
compelling reasons. And inevitably, there will be some that should be taken
through that process. Is that your-
Yeah
... Yeah?
Claims that would not be able to affect outcomes in a hearing should not be able
to proceed to hearing, and that should be able to be knocked out pretty early so
that applicants and associated entities don't face
the cost of dealing with that.
But does that happen anyway in practice? Do you know?
I don't know whether that's right or not because presumably the commissioners will
look at
the claims andI-
Sure
... and that, as I presume, they, they are the ones trying to work
out whether a claim is taken through to a hearing or not.
Is that not
Well, the, the risk is that claims get withdrawn fairly late in the
game after applicants have incurred cost, and then
it's a threat point for officials that are trying to effectively change
the local alcohol policy through piecemeal interventions in
licensing applications and renewals.
Yeah. Why do you support hairdressers?
Do you, is it just a principle that-
Oh
... people should be free, but why, if you're going to support hairdressers, why
aren't you supporting other groups?
Oh, well, the, well, that's a strong point in our submission.
We suggest that you should be evaluating the effects here.
If they are as innocuous as I would expect, then it should extend to other
comparable situations. If you're going to get your nails done, for example,
or another kind of salon treatment, or any other kind of scheduled,
low risk, you know the customer kind of environment,
extend it to those as well. If instead we find that there's, uh,
secret speakeasies opening up in barber shops, which I don't
expect, but, like, maybe it'll happen.
I real- I bet heavily against it.
If you find that instead, well, you scale back.
Take this as an initial starting point, as an experiment.
See if-
But-
... low risk situations can have low risk, uh, regulation
I, I understand the idea of, uh, freedom and doing what you like,
but it, don't you bel- think it's slightly perverse that just
hairdressers are allowed to do it?
I'm not getting at hairdressers, they do a wonderful function, but as you quite
rightly say, um, um, someone doing nails, pedicure
for women or whatever, um, that is a very similar.
Why should hairdressers in particular-
Oh
... be given that right?
I suspect that it was drafted this way because there were particular outcomes in
Wellington. So it had been fairly common practice at a lot of barber shops here to
give you a nice craft beer when you went to get your hair done, and then
police officers here started being jerks about it and trying to crack down
on outlets that were causing nobody any harm.
And so this seems like a response to that particular
situation. I would be, I would be comfortable with it being extended more
broadly to comparable services. I would also be comfortable with it
opening with this and then potentially being extended as an, on an experiment trial
basis.
Yeah, okay, cool. Right. Any other questions from anyone else?
I do note that you've got a clause in there about, um, having a
review of the bill in time, which is not currently provided
for in the bill.
All right. Okay. Hey, thank you. Um, nice to see you again, Eric.
Thank you.
Um, thanks for turning up in person.
I know you're in Wellington, but it's nice when people do turn up.
Thank you.
Right. We're going to the Upper Hutt Cosmopolitan Club.
Um, Lisa, hopefully you're available.
Good afternoon. Um-
How are you?
I'm very well, thank you.
You, you look like you're busy at work.
Oh, look, yes, always.
Right.
I didn't intend to actually be sitting nicely in the middle of the club so that you
could kind of get a, a grip for what we do, but unfortunately, I've hurt my foot,
so, um, I'm both, so. Anyway-
That's all right
... um-
Well, I, I was there last week, so I know exactly what it's like.
Oh, beautiful. I hope you n- had a good-
What were you doing up in the, in the Upper Hutt Cosmopolitan
Club other than work?
I'd been for a walk in the hills and I'd, um, and I thought it was a nice place to
stop and get some kai and a cold beer. Very affordable and lovely people.
Nice. I'm pleased you had a good experience.
Um-
Right
... thank you for this opportunity.
I really wanted to, uh, just have this
moment really just to r- bring the face of clubs
to you. Um, I think there's, clubs are not the,
um, one size fits all. There are many different, uh, kinds of
clubs. We've heard, uh, people talking earlier about, you know, the smaller
sports clubs,
but there are some much, um, different clubs such as the, the
Cosy Club, and I do think it's important, uh, to remember that we're not
all the same. Um, under the Amendment Bill,
clubs that, um, uh, would not
be able to comply under a non-license just wouldn't apply, and I doubt,
very much doubt the council, uh, would allow them to, um,
get that license. So I think we are talking more about the clubs such
as the, the Cosy, uh, that is probably, it's, you know,
far better set up to, um, handle the effect.
So we strongly support the Sale and Supply of Alcohol, uh,
Amendment Bill, uh, particularly the changes allowing clubs to hold
non-license, the streamlining of special licensing, and the
practical recognition of the role that clubs play in our
communities.
I want to focus less on the technical stuff today, uh, but just
more really what clubs actually are because we're not just
places that sell alcohol. We are very much part of the community.
We're owned by the community, we're visited by the community,
and you know, we return huge benefit to the community.
So taking, um, our wonderful club a- as an example,
uh, the Upper Hutt Cosy Club, we have around six and a half thousand members.
Uh, we have 20 sporting and special interest groups,
and that can be everything from, um, darts and
indoor bowls, outdoor bowls, to more sort of,
uh, theater sty- theater groups and travel groups for our
seniors. So we have a very wide, uh,
program.
Uh, we also have 60 staff, so we're one of Upper Hutt's larger,
um, employers. Uh, we do have three courtesy
coaches, uh, quite a large entertainment program.
Uh, we run community events, and we also, uh, provide
ongoing support for local organizations, uh, that can
exist by providing them with space and, um, funding and that
sort of thing.Originally we were formed in
1961, so this year we're actually celebrating our
65th birthday. And then we were rebuilt after a
devastating fire in 2003, which means our building's
celebrating its 21st birthday at the same time.
Because of the rebuild, we are a modern community facility
that now serves people of all ages across Upper Hutt.
For many of our members,
the clubs is where they socialize, they celebrate
milestones, watch sport together,
volunteers. We
couldn't do all of the things that we do without some
volunteers.
Join activity groups and just
essentially stay connected to each other and that community-
Look, I'm just wondering whether we might just jump to questions
of-
Yeah. Absolutely
... we've read your submission, right?
And obviously, people like Duncan
Webb, if he's recommending you, it must be fantastic.
So, but two questions. First of all, you said that your
opening remark was around
off license. Are you saying under the bill, clubs could
potentially set up and sell
alcohol through a sort of a separate subsidiary
shop system? Is that provided for? Is that what you meant by that?
No. You may have misheard me. It was an on license.
On license.
So it was around the provision, currently the clubs operate
under a club license, and that has quite a few restrictions
for us. So it's very hard.
Duncan's obviously a member of either our club or
another club.
Yeah.
When he walked in the door, he would've been asked if he had a membership card
with him. If he didn't, he'd have to be signed in.
It's not the easiest or most welcoming
entry to a club if you're new to that kind of
environment.
Yeah.
So it is quite restrictive for us to grow our membership,
which is kind of why a lot of clubs currently have
a much older demographic. Our challenge, if we want to
stay relevant going forward, is to be able to
attract younger members and families.
We've just invested and just waiting for it to
come through building consent, a huge children's playground so that
our grandparents can bring their grandies for-
So the
clubs generally wouldn't want to be selling alcohol other than over the
bar.
No, no. We don't. We actually do hold an on license.
I mean, sorry, an off license as well currently.
But to be fair, that doesn't really get used.
Okay. Now, Section 60, we heard from Clubs New Zealand this
morning that
you've got your three types of licenses
and where you want a special license, obviously there's a lot of problems
around that, and you talk about that in your submission.
There was this view that if you want to apply for that special
license,
even a small club could apply under the Class 1
rules, and therefore... But you'd have to define what an authorized customer
is and
what the functions were. What's your view around if
you were to make it so clubs could act in a more for
those types of funerals and special events,
what would your reaction be if you had to apply and
you probably are a Class 1 club anyway, but I'm thinking-
We are a Class 1
... more about bowling clubs or something, which are dying
around the country because people don't want to go,
what's happening in small rural communities.
We
do a lot of Class 1 special licenses.
In fact,
we have a special license in place for some entertainment that we have
tonight.
So we probably have a special license a week,
that does create quite a lot of cost to us and
time, and also time for the council to have to go
through and approve it. So we would be very supportive of anything that would
simplify that, especially member functions.
For
a family, I think there was a judge put a ruling out not so
long ago that you couldn't bring in more than eight people without a special
license.
It's kind of inhibitive if you're having
granny's 60th or 80th birthday or
your
son's 21st birthday and you want to have it in a controlled environment
where it is nice and safe.
So the only way you can have a, let's say, granny's birthday,
her 80th or whatever, let's say,
and you want to have family members, the only way to do it is you have to go
through a special license, which takes 21 days to process and
has money attached to it.
If the majority of the people are not going to be
members, and say you've got 100 people, then yes.
So that's the definition, not eight people are non-members.
The different
licensing criteria will
have different
assessments
on it. But generally-
And I presume that's what you mean is just lack of
consistency makes it difficult.
Yeah, it does. Yeah.
Yeah.
But certainly, if
you're not a member of a club
and you want to hold your grandmother's funeral
or a birthday,
we would need to get a special license for you.
Okay. Right. Okay. Members, other questions, anyone else?
No. Hey, well, thank you, Lisa. Obviously, we need to come and see you,
all of us.
More than welcome anytime.
In that very modern facility of yoursNo doubt cost you
a fortune to get the building consent.
We'll see.
All right. We'll see what happens.
Thank you very much.
All right. Lovely to hear from you.
Right. Now, we're going to Colin Bridel, Zoom.
Colin, are you with us?
Oh. Okay.
How are you, Colin? We've got five minutes with you.
We've read your submission, but-
Okay
... maybe hit the highlights.
Okay.
I'd actually like to hit the highlight after listening to a lot that's
been said today. I'm one of the people that's been
accused of being frivolous and vexatious
as an objector.
Okay.
And I think that's an area that hasn't been covered.
So I think the easiest way for
me to answer that is that
we have overzealous people,
that, dare I say, beat up on objectors
like myself. And I want to read an excerpt from
an ARLA decision.
It says,
"The authority is not satisfied that there was a lack of good faith on Mr.
Bridel's part in prosecuting his appeal.
In respect to the primary question, that Mr.
Bridel may have brought this appeal because of concerns
relating both to alcohol and gambling, and it does not render
the appeal an abuse of process. The authority is
not satisfied that the pleading was frivolous, and that
it trifled with the authority's process or vexatious,
and that it contains an element of impropriety.
The consequence of the premises not being a tavern as defined in the
act may have been that the premises could not have
hosted gaming machines pertained to the Gambling Act
was not an issue for the authority or had jurisdiction."
And it goes on and it says, "While delaying giving the effect to the
decision of the DLC commissioned by the appellant, it
caused the respondent to suffer economic
loss." A lot of people-
Can I ask you, how many
times have you made submissions against
licenses?
I would say about,
oh, over the years, and I mean years-
Yeah
... because I live in Tokoroa.
Yeah. I see you're South Waikato.
In the South Waikato, where we have a high rate of domestic violence and
family violence.
Yeah. How many have you made?
Over the years, on average about
three or four a year.
And how far afield are you... When you say
you live in Tokoroa, are you making submissions in Tokoroa, or are you making
them-
Yes
... How far? Do you go south-
I'm making them in Tokoroa
... or do you go to the South Island?
Just in Tokoroa.
Okay.
So I have-
So you're just in your area.
Sorry?
You're just in your area.
Just in my area.
And is that because... And why are you doing three a year? Is there a lot of...
You've obviously got a lot of licenses there, off licenses there or what?
We've got a lot of licenses for a small community.
But my-
Okay
... and we have,
and what also adds to that is a turnover of some of the venues
because of the ownership's changed because of
out-of-town owners and things like that happen as
well.
Okay. And so obviously, under this
piece of legislation, this bill as it is at the moment, you'd still be
able to make submissions because you're in your local area.
Yes, because I'm in my local.
What are your concerns about it then?
My concerns are that when you have
a number of people being excluded, for me,
I've had a lot of expert help from communities against
alcohol harm. And they've helped me because
initially I didn't understand how the law worked.
And so when you advocate for a
community, you have to be precise in your
objection of what you're objecting to and how,
and they run it like dotting a checklist, for the lack of a better
expression to use.
And so if you don't understand how that clearly works,
you get sidelined or put out, and I've been put out more
often than I've been let in.
And the problem is that I spent years helping people,
working alongside and walking alongside the
people that have been harmed in this community.
To roll back
the present law to this new thing is going
to mean I'm going to face the same sorts of
comments from one particular lawyer.
He said to me, "Oh, you live the other side of the railway
track, so the
railway track creates a barrier between you and where the
venue is." And yet I only live 600 meters from
that particular venue,
and we're on the main route where
people when they
finish at night-
Okay. But this-
... will pass there
... this bill won't... This bill, obviously you've got issues with particular
submissions, but this bill's not going to preclude you from making submissions
still if you're only 600 meters from the venue.
It will from the perspective of they will start
looking at
how are you affected, how are you impacted, and you've got the right of
reply issues that happen.
So what are your concern about the right of reply?
I've been bullied by,
umPast lawyers and
things when our DLC chairperson
has excluded me from being able to present at
some hearings. And just recently, I was at a hearing,
and I can't show you this, but it's important.
I had a police report, a Police NAV report done,
and at the end of the report it says, "Police request the
non-publication order of the information contained in these
slides due to the risk of individuals being
identifiable if specific locations are mentioned."
And so what we have is a community like ours that
has a high number of venues, that is
suffering from lots of alcohol harm in the people that we work with,
and we don't always get a fair hearing.
I think the laws need to be updated, and not in the
way that they're being asked for now.
The harm to the children of this community is
ongoing, it's endemic, and it's costing the
country heaps.
So
I'm-
All right.
Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you, Mr. Bridel.
Very useful to hear what you've been going through.
Obviously,
you are very passionate about it, so it's good to have your
perspective on that. Hey, thanks for joining us this afternoon.
Thank you.
Okay. Right. Sue Moroney. Is-
Mr. Chair ... Anna, is Sue, is she joining?
We don't have her online yet, but we do- Okay.
That's why I saw Jason come up ... have Jason. So we've got Jason Alexander.
I think you're on Zoom or about to be.
There we are.
Hey, Jason.
Kia ora.
Nice to see you. Hey, now we've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you.
Tēnā koutou katoa. Ka mihi ahau ki ngā mema o te komiti mō
te whai wāhi ki te kōrero o tēnei rā. Ko Jason Alexander tāku ingoa.
He uri ahau nō Te Taitokerau. I am the Chief Operating Officer at Hāpai
Te Hauora, and we are a national Māori public health organization,
committed to advancing Māori health and well-being.
Our work is grounded in Te Tiriti, kaupapa Māori approaches,
and the lived realities of whānau and communities across Aotearoa, and today
I'm here to oppose this bill.
As you have already heard, alcohol causes more harm in Aotearoa than any other
drug. Not meth, not cannabis, but alcohol.
Yet despite this, it's readily available, heavily marketed to our people, and
treated as part of our cultural identity rather than a public health risk.
Rugby, racing, and beer.
The bill has been presented as a much needed step towards
reforming alcohol legislation. We hear talk about cutting through red
tape, freeing up businesses, and encouraging economic growth, but we know that we
cannot drink ourselves to prosperity.
This industry-friendly framing needs to be examined, because we have seen this
tactic before in other sectors that also profit from harmful
products. They're quick to lead with the benefits and happy to
omit or
downgrade the costs, but when those costs are the health and well-being of our
whānau, of our communities, then we have a responsibility to speak up.
For decades, Māori have carried the heaviest burden of alcohol harm in
Aotearoa. We see that harm in our hospitals, in our homes, and
in the preventable loss of Māori lives.
One in four Māori are classified as hazardous drinkers,
and too often the alcohol harm is framed as
poor individual choice,
while the systems and policies that drive the harm are ignored.
For too long, these systems have prioritized industry interests over the well-being
of whānau and communities. We see this in targeted marketing
and alcohol licenses granted with little regard for local
context, and in the saturation of outlets across our
communities. Communities that are already at breaking point and less able
to take any more.
We have several key concerns with this bill.
First,
loosening restrictions and increasing access to alcohol sends the wrong message to
our communities, especially our rangatahi.
It will further normalize alcohol in everyday life when we should be
doing the opposite.
Second, this bill risks increasing the number of outlets in our communities,
and we know the evidence is clear here.
Greater availability leads to greater harm, so more
violence, more addiction, and more suffering.
Again, Māori and low income communities already experience higher alcohol outlet
density than others,
and this bill was
an opportunity to address that inequity, but instead it risks entrenching it.
Thirdly,
community voices matter, yet this bill seeks to narrow who can object by imposing
arbitrary boundary limits and making an already difficult
and unbalanced objection process even more difficult.
Communities deserve to be heard on decisions that affect their safety and
well-being, and they need fewer barriers, not more.
Fourth, Te Tiriti is not optional.
It's a binding obligation requiring the Crown to
actively protect Māori health and well-being, and this bill falls short of that
obligation.
And lastly, when we look at this bill, we see a familiar pattern.
So the alcohol industry has significant resource.
It has a lot of influence and reach.
It's lobbied hard for provisions that protect profit, expand market
access, and limit the ability of local communities to push back.
The relationship between availability, affordability, and
alcohol-related harm is well-established,
yet this bill in its current form reflects industry preference over public health
guidance. It puts profit before people.
And people are not asking for greater access to alcohol, they're asking for less.
They're looking for fewer bottle stores, safer streets, strong protections for
rangatahi,
communities that are free from the harms caused by alcohol.And
this bill, once again, in its current form ignores those voices.
When we talk about policy, we're talking about real people, real whanau, and real
communities affected by the decisions made in this room.
And because of this, our position is clear that this bill should not pass in its
current form.
But if it does, we urge the committee to put harm reduction
and whanau voices back at the center, and this means stopping the expansion
of alcohol availability and stretching full objection rights
to communities, strengthening controls on availability, advertising, and
access, and explicitly recognizing te tiriti in the
legislation.
We are not asking for perfection, and we certainly are not demanding prohibition,
but we are asking for courage because the status quo, business
as usual, is hurting our whanau and it's hurting our communities.
I think every year that passes without meaningful wellbeing centered reform means
more preventable harm, more preventable trauma, more pressure on our
health system, and more preventable deaths, and the keyword in that
paragraph is preventable.
The question is not whether alcohol harm can be reduced,
but whether you'll choose to reduce it.
Just in closing, in the general policy statement of this bill,
there's a line that says alcohol regulation should aim to strike a balance between
minimizing the potential for alcohol related harm and avoiding unnecessary
constraints on legitimate businesses that sell alcohol.
And I guess that's where we have sort of problem,
and what we feel is wrong with this bill.
It speaks of balance as though both sides carry equal weighting, but
harm and profit should not be treated as equals.
A community's right to be safe should not be weighed equally against an industry's
right to profit from the harm caused.
Next month,
Hapai Te Hora, we're running a campaign that targets tane Maori, inviting
them to push pause on their alcohol consumption for the month,
to focus on their health, and most importantly, reflect on their relationship with
this product that causes so much harm.
I think maybe as a nation, this is also what we need to do, just pause,
reflect, and ask honestly what alcohol is
costing our whanau, our communities,
and our country.
Once again, we cannot drink ourselves to prosperity.
And I thank you again for the opportunity to speak today.
Okay. Thank you, Jason. Very nice
submission. Right. Members, any questions for Jason?
Okay.
No. A good submission, and appreciated that.
Yeah, appreciate that.
Sure.
Jason, we've had a lot of submitters,
but very good to hear from you again.
Right. Members, I'm going to ask that we go back into private
session. I want to do a couple of things in private,
and then we'll resume shortly thereafter.
So if you can go straight into your private link.
Is everyone all right with that? I'm just looking at some of the new members.
Hopefully you've got all that connection, but we'll go straight into private
session
now.Are
you there?
Sue, are you there?
Coming now.
Mr. Chair, she's just coming on now.
Okay.
You all right there, Sue?
Sue
Kia ora.
Hey, Sue. We're fast-moving. We're nearly broken and gone for afternoon
tea.
Ah.
But anyway, we heard you were here.
Anyway, welcome from Matamata or wherever you're
from,
or calling from. Hey, now, we've got five minutes with you.
Great. Thank you. Look, thanks so much for allowing
me the time to speak to my submission.
I'm doing this as an individual.
I'm relying quite heavily on the time I spent as the
CEO for Community Law Centers, Aotearoa.
I'm no longer in that position, so I'm not representing that organization.
But in that role,
I oversaw the project that we were
doing at Community Law, where we were providing free legal support to
communities who wished to be involved in District Licensing Committee
hearings.
And so, very much come from that experience
where what
I observed in that role was that it was very, very
difficult for community to have their voice heard and to object
to those processes. They're very daunting for people to be involved
in. So that's why I'm concerned to
see the proposals to
reduce community participation and community voice that I
see through this bill.
The reduction and the return to
assessing whether people have got a role in their local District
Licensing Committees hearings or not based on how
close they live to the license is not
understanding the way community works and the way people
participate in their communities, which is
significantly wider than living within a certain
range of where the license is being heard from.
So the
truncating of community voice is of particular concern to me.
The point of the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act is to reduce
alcohol harm, and we can only really do that as a
community if community are involved.
I
live in Hamilton, so not Matamata, Mr.
Chair, but-
Well, nearby
Well, it was nearby. And in
Hamilton City, we are one of the few
cities in Aotearoa that does not have a local alcohol plan.
So the ability for our community to have any
voice over what they think is appropriate about the sale and supply of
alcohol is absolutely limited to just District Licensing Committee
hearings only because they have not had an opportunity.
I have not had an opportunity as a community member to express a view through a
local alcohol plan consultation and process.
In our city, we have, in 2023, at least when the
last research that I've seen was done on this, we had
75 off licenses in our city,
fourth-largest city in the country.
Quite a proliferation of off licenses for a city of our size,
of about 192,000 people. And I want to note
that in that same year, there were five applications made for
new licenses.
Only one of those was opposed, so the level
of opposition
is not high. And I also note that in
that same year, there were 34 that were re-licensed and only three were opposed.
So the idea that there's widespread
opposition going on that needs to be clamped down on from
community, that I think is inherent in what I see
being proposed by this bill is demonstrably not correct.
So look, I'll leave my comments there. I've put a written submission in.
I'm happy to answer any questions that I can about any issues that
I've raised.
So just your clause 16, your
second bullet point, which prevents
DLCs from declining renewal applications solely because it's
inconsistent. That's the point you're making, because you don't have one in
Hamilton. We heard that from a counselor.
Then-
Well, no, yes, I am making that point, Mr. Chair.
Sorry to interrupt, but I'm
additionally making the point that because an LAP is an
opportunity where community gets to say what they find
acceptable or not in sale and supply of alcohol in their
city. In our instance, we don't have that opportunity to do that.
Yeah.
So the only time that we could have anything to say as community members
about alcohol licensing is by going to individual District
Licensing Committee hearings, and that's why I don't want to see
that right and that availability
contained as this bill proposes to do, or reduced.
Yeah. Okay, cool. Right. Members, any other questions
for Sue?
All right. Good to see you again. I hope you're well,
and thank you for your submission today. All right.
Ka kite ano. Thank you for your time.
Right. Now, hopefully, we've got Mr.
Brewer, Robert Brewer in the... Oh, there he is, too.
All in there. Right. Robert, we have you for 10
minutes. Thank you for coming in slightly earlier,
and you are between us and afternoon tea.
But don't
take that the wrong way. We are here to listen and intently as we
will.
Oh, far be it from me to get in the way of afternoon tea.
I'll
be brief then, and then I will expect no questions.
Or shall I say nothing that will
mean that I have to talk any longer.
But
one quick thing. Sue said something that really, just before,
the submitter just before me, said something quite interesting, which
was that Hamilton does not have an LAP.
Well, they doOf course, because the act provides for it.
And that was one of the
things that we thought was quite good about the act, that if
territorial authorities couldn't or did not want to progress one, the
act provided for it. I just
want to make that point before I lead on.
And are you saying that through the
act at the moment, there is then-
Yeah, there are default provisions in the act
that provide the
equivalent of what a local alcohol policy would
do
for those
territorial authorities or those district
councils, et cetera, that determine that they
don't want to have one. So another example of that is Wellington.
Wellington has not determined
to go through a process to create its own local alcohol policy,
so operates under the provisions set down in the act.
Okay, cool.
I just sort of heard the previous submitter
say that, so I thought I'd make that point.
My points are generally are going to be more contextual,
because I'm aware obviously of the
time and obviously of the number of submitters that you would've previously heard.
One of the things that I did want to pick up on was, particularly in
and around the
proposal of the bill to
return to what might be called the
previous regime or what was existing in the act,
prior to another amendment bill.
I just wanted to make that point so that the committee was
aware that what is being proposed in
a good deal of the bill basically takes us
back to a time
which has existed since the Sale and Supply of Alcohol
Act coming into force in 2012. And I say that
only for the purposes of saying that since
2012, so that's 14
years and change, years ago, where New Zealand has seen
the greatest reduction in both
overall consumption and harmful consumption.
Since changes to the act were made
about two plus, three plus years ago,
to the point we have now, which this bill is
addressing, there hasn't been, shall we say, a
landslide fall in
consumption or harmful consumption.
So I would make the point that
perhaps calls or
submissions that are saying that by
implementing this bill, particularly in and around the
submission process and the
play that local alcohol policies have, the grandparenting
clauses, et cetera. I ask that the
committee assess those claims
based not on the necessary
here and the now, but what has gone before.
Because we're essentially trying to come back to a
midpoint, which was the existing legislation
that has existed for 14 plus years, and
which has overseen,
in part, a massive cultural shift and a reduction in
consumption and harmful consumption.
And within that, I don't envy the committee and the membership
in this, because of course,
it's easy for me to sit here and make a case from
my perspective and others will make a case from
their perspectives.
The committee members, however, have to sit in the middle and
try and balance what they hear against what is in front of them in the
bill. And so my point is that,
from my perspective and my members' perspective,
the bill and the existing act has always been in
place or should have been in place to
be coherent, in particular around licensing, such
that
those
people who are deemed to be not good license
holders are able to be dealt with. And
those people who are considered to be
good or appropriate license holders are continued to allow to
trade. It would be my proposition that up
until quite recently,
that
has sometimes been lost through
the way that the act has allowed
district licensing authorities and
certain parties to be able to,
if you like,
oversee or have
due moment around licensing. So what I'm talking about here is the thing that I
think the bill is trying to do at its core, and that is to create
consistency across decision-making.
And in fact, in my submission I say that it could go further.
And I'll just spend one minute on that, and then if there are questions before you
have your cuppa, I'll take them. But the thing about
consistency
is that
the application of the
necessary constraints or otherwise through licensing processes
are consistently applied across the country.
This billBegins to create that
consistency.
We believe that it could go further, and by further, I
mean in terms of better definition of what a good
licence holder looks like and what a not so good licence
holder looks like. If a
bill or an act of Parliament could do that, then I think a
lot of what is being discussed and probably what has been
submitted on all sides would be much
better catered for. Because surely this is
about who are the good operators and who are the not
so good operators, and does the act in its
current form necessarily allow
a true exposition and a detailed look at
that? Current form, I don't think so.
This bill goes some way to righting that balance.
That's all I have to say. Happy to take questions.
Okay. We've got Mr. Todd Stevenson up first.
Oh, good. Thanks for your submission.
Just on this idea of good licence holders, bad licence holders,
are you thinking like what a series of criteria or
principles? Is that kind of what you had in mind?
Yes, indeed. So one of the things that I've observed over the-- Those of
us who go back far enough to
know what it was like before
2012 and after 2012, one of the things
that is I think eminently obvious is that
some
licensing committees struggle with that definition.
So why don't we work together and define what that is?
So what is a
good operator versus a not so good operator?
What operators have proper staff training processes
so that
underage purchases are more easily picked up?
Who implements technology to help with that?
Who has
failed a CPO in the last three months, six months, year?
Whatever
is deemed appropriate to draw that line between good
and not so good, and then let's enshrine that.
In that way, a licensing committee, wherever they may be,
immediately has a benchmark against which to test.
Okay. What about your view around positioning of non-alcoholic
beverages next door to alcoholic ones?
What you just sort of came-
I think that's a common sense approach.
I know, once again, I would think that you will have heard from others who would be
saying that,
I don't know, there might be some issues with that.
But
the fact of the matter is having them within,
say, in a supermarket and
the alcohol area, et cetera, just I think is a common sense approach
to a product and product line that
more easily lives in that space.
Right. Okay, cool. Righto. I don't think I've got any more questions.
Thank you for coming, and thank you for coming to see us a bit earlier than
was expected. All right.
No, my pleasure. Have a good cup of tea.
Thank you, and members, we'll be back.
I'm going to suggest we come back at
3:45. Just give ourselves 10 minutes. Is that all right?
Okay. Right. We'll see you back in 10 minutes, guys.